---
layout: post
title: Summary
cover: cover.jpg
date:   2020-05-31 12:00:00
categories: posts
---

This article is the last out of four posts of the _Machine Learning in Talent Hiring_ series. In this last post, we will briefly summarise the motivation on applying machine learning in the recruitment process, as well as its examples of applications and the caveats from an ethical perspective on using machine learning as a tool.

---

It becomes apparent that as the availability of data is provided, supported with the advancement in the hardware sector, machine learning becomes a favourite tool to solve many real-life problems. Without a doubt, many companies have adopted machine learning algorithms to be incorporated within their talent-hiring funnel.

There are many reasons to do this, but most of them revolve around automation and a better hiring team scalability. As the business of the company grows, the hiring volume would also be increasing, which can potentially burden the load of the hiring team. However, with the help from machine learning algorithms, human involvement can be minimised or even cancelled on certain repetitive subtasks, so hiring team can focus on doing and innovating on more exciting tasks that needed them the most. From the perspective of the job applicants, machine learning involvement means a faster hiring process, creating potentially a better sentiment towards the company, and increasing the probability of the company winning during the talent war with other companies who also demanded new employees.

In terms of applications, several machine learning tasks can be incorporated within the recruitment pipeline. Some of them focus more on the first few stages within hiring funnel, where the candidate volume hits the most significant quantity, and where the automatic decision is more comfortable to be made. One notable example is in the case of LinkedIn, who uses deep learning on providing better talent searching by taking into account the potential mutual engagement between recruiter and candidates. A chatbot can also be incorporated to increase initial resume-based interview and hiring team can use multimedia CV to predict the Big Five personalities of a candidate during the initial interview.

While it is helpful to use machine learning as a tool to solve some hiring problems, it is also worth noting that humans involve within the system should be aware of many potential biases that can happen. Just like the case of Amazon who discarded their machine learning recruitment tool in 2017, many potential ethical issues can underlie the algorithm, such as discrimination against protected attributes, or privacy concern regarding the use of data during and after a hiring process, and the explainability of the outcome given by the algorithms. While it is interesting to incorporate machine learning as a solution, human awareness towards ethical issues should also be taken into consideration on building machine learning models.
